
With or without such a message, though, we will have reason to continue outward, seeking other solar systems. Or-even safer in this unpredictable and violent sector of the Galaxy-to sequester some of us in self-sufficient habitations in interstellar space, far from the dangers constituted by the stars. Such a future would, I think, naturally evolve, by slow increments, even without any grand goal of interstellar travel:
For safety, some communities may wish to sever their ties with the rest of humanity-uninfluenced by other societies, other ethical codes, other technological imperatives. In a time when comets and asteroids are being routinely repositioned, we will be able to populate a small world and then cut it loose. In successive generations, as this world sped outward, the Earth would fade from bright star to pale dot to invisibility; the Sun would appear dimmer, until it was no more than a vaguely yellow point of light, lost among thousands of others. The travelers would approach interstellar night. Some such communities may be content with occasional radio and laser traffic with the old home worlds. Others, confident of the superiority of their own survival chances and wary of contamination, may try to disappear. Perhaps all contact with them will ultimately be lost, their very existence forgotten.
Even the resources of a sizable asteroid or comet are finite, though, and eventually more resources must be sought elsewhere-especially water, needed for drink, for a breathable oxygen atmosphere, and for hydrogen to power fusion reactors. So in the long run these communities must migrate from world to world, with no lasting loyalty to any. We might call it "pioneering," or "homesteading." A less sympathetic observer might describe it as sucking dry the resources of little world after little world. But there are a trillion little worlds in the Oort Comet Cloud.
Living in small numbers on a modest stepmother world far from the Sun, we will know that every scrap of food and every drop of water is dependent on the smooth operation of a 
farsighted technology; but these conditions are not radically unlike those to which we are already accustomed. Digging resources out of the ground and stalking passing resources seem oddly familiar, like a forgotten memory of childhood: It is, with a few significant changes, the strategy of our hunter-gatherer ancestors. For 99.9 percent of the tenure of humans on Earth, we lived such a life. Judging from some of the last surviving hunter-gatherers just before they were engulfed by the present global civilization, we may have been relatively happy. It's the kind of life that forged us. So after a brief, only partially successful sedentary experiment, we may become wanderers again-more technological than last time, but even then our technology, stone tools and fire, was our only hedge against extinction.
If safety lies in isolation and remoteness, then some of our descendants will eventually emigrate to the outer comets of the Oort Cloud. With a trillion cometary nuclei, each separated from the next by about as much as Mars is from Earth, there will be a great deal to do out there.
The outer edge of the Sun's Oort Cloud is perhaps halfway to the nearest star. Not every other star has an Oort Cloud, but many probably do. As the Sun passes nearby stars, our Oort Cloud will encounter, and partially pass through, other comet clouds, like two swarms of gnats interpenetrating but not colliding. To occupy a comet of another star will then be not much more difficult than to occupy one of our own. From the frontiers of some other solar system the children of the blue dot may peer longingly at the moving points of light denoting substantial (and well-lit) planets. Some communities-feeling the ancient human love for oceans and sunlight stirring within them-may begin the long journey down to the bright, warm, and clement planets of a new sun.
Other communities may consider this last strategy a weakness. Planets are associated with natural catastrophes. Planets may have pre-existing life and intelligence. Planets are easy for other beings to find. Better to remain in the darkness. Better to spread ourselves among many "small and obscure worlds. Better to stay hidden.


ONCE WE CAN SEND our machines and ourselves far from home, far from the planets-once we really enter the theater of the Universe-we are bound to come upon phenomena unlike anything we've ever encountered. Here are three possible examples:
First: Starting some 550 astronomical units (AU) out-about ten times farther from the Sun than Jupiter, and therefore much more accessible than the Oort Cloud-there's something extraordinary. Just as an ordinary lens focuses far-off images, so does gravity. (Gravitational lensing by distant stars and galaxies is now being detected.) Five hundred fifty AU from the Sun-only a year away if we could travel at 1 percent the speed of light-is where the focus begins (although when effects of the solar corona, the halo of ionized gas surrounding the Sun, are taken into account, the focus may be considerably farther out). There, distant radio signals are enormously enhanced, amplifying whispers. The magnification of distant images would allow us (with a modest radio telescope) to resolve a continent at the distance of the nearest star and the inner Solar System at the distance of the nearest spiral galaxy. If you are free to roam an imaginary spherical shell at the appropriate focal distance and centered on the Sun, you are free to explore the Universe in stupendous magnification, to peer at it with unprecedented clarity, to eavesdrop on the radio signals of distant civilizations, if any, and to glimpse the earliest events in the history of the Universe. Alternatively, the lens could be used the other way, to amplify a very modest signal of ours so it could be heard over immense distances. There are reasons that draw us to hundreds and thousands of AU. Other civilizations will have their own regions of gravitational focusing, depending on the mass and radius of their star, some a little closer, some a little farther away than ours. Gravitational lensing may serve as a common inducement for civilizations to explore the regions just beyond the planetary parts of their solar systems.
Second: Spend a moment thinking about brown dwarfs, hypothetical very low temperature stars, considerably more massive than Jupiter, but considerably less massive than the Sun. Nobody knows if brown dwarfs exist. Some experts, using nearer stars as gravitational lenses to detect the presence of more distant ones, claim to have found evidence of brown dwarfs. From the tiny fraction of the whole sky that has so far been observed by this technique, an enormous number of brown dwarfs is inferred. Others disagree. In the 1950s, it was suggested by the astronomer Harlow Shapley of Harvard that brown dwarfs-he called them "Lilliputian stars"-were inhabited. He pictured their surfaces as warm as a June day in Cambridge, with lots of area. They would be stars that humans could survive on and explore.
Third: The physicists B. J. Carr and Stephen Hawking of Cambridge University have shown that fluctuations in the density of matter in the earliest stages of the Universe could have generated a wide variety of small black holes. Primordial black holes-if they exist-must decay by emitting radiation to space, a consequence of the laws of quantum mechanics. The less massive the black hole, the faster it dissipates. Any primordial black hole in the final stages of decay today would have to weigh about as much as a mountain. All the smaller ones are gone. Since the abundance-to say nothing of the existence-of primordial black holes depends on what happened in the earliest moments after the Big Bang, no one can be sure that there are any to be found; we certainly can't be sure that any lie nearby. Not very restrictive upper limits on their abundance have been set by the failure so far to find short gamma ray pulses, a component of the Hawking radiation.
In a separate study, G. E. Brown of Caltech and the pioneering nuclear physicist Hans Bethe of Cornell suggest that about a billion non-primordial black holes are strewn through the Galaxy, generated in the evolution of stars. If so, the nearest may be only 10 or 20 lightyears away.
If there are black holes within reach-whether they're as massive as mountains or as stars-we will have amazing physics to study firsthand, as well as a formidable new source of energy. By no means do I claim that brown dwarfs or primordial black holes are likely within a few light-years, or anywhere. But as we enter interstellar space, it is inevitable that we will stumble upon whole new categories of wonders and delights, some with transforming practical applications.
I do not know where my train of argument ends. As more time passes, attractive new denizens of the cosmic zoo will draw us farther outward, and increasingly improbable and deadly catastrophes must come to pass. The probabilities are cumulative. But, as time goes on, technological species will also accrue greater and greater powers, far surpassing any we can imagine today. Perhaps, if we are very skillful (lucky, I think, won't be enough), we will ultimately spread far from home, sailing through the starry archipelagos of the vast Milky Way Galaxy. If we come upon anyone else-or, more likely, if they come upon us-we will harmoniously interact. Since other spacefaring civilizations are likely to be much more advanced than we, quarrelsome humans in interstellar space are unlikely to last long.
Eventually, our future may be as Voltaire, of all people, imagined:

Sometimes by the help of a sunbeam, and sometimes by the convenience of a comet, [they] glided from sphere to sphere, as a bird hops from bough to bough. In a very little time [they] posted through the Milky Way . . .

We are, even now, discovering vast numbers of gas and dust disks around young stars-the very structures out of which, in our solar system four and a half billion years ago, the Earth and the other planets formed. We're beginning to understand how fine dust grains slowly grow into worlds; how big Earthlike planets accrete and then quickly capture hydrogen and helium to become the hidden cores of gas giants; and how small terrestrial planets remain comparatively bare of atmosphere. We are reconstructing the histories of worlds-how mainly ices and organics collected together in the chilly outskirts of the early Solar System, and mainly rock and metal in the inner regions warmed by the young Sun. We have begun to recognize the dominant role of early collisions in knocking worlds over, gouging huge craters and basins in their surfaces and interiors, spinning them up, making and obliterating moons, creating rings, carrying, it may be, whole oceans down from the skies, and then depositing a veneer of organic matter as the neat finishing touch in the creation of worlds. We are beginning to apply this knowledge to other systems.
In the next few decades we have a real chance of examining the layout and something of the composition of many other mature planetary systems around nearby stars. We will begin to know which aspects of our system are the rule and which the exception. What is more common-planets like Jupiter, planets like Neptune, or planets like Earth? Or do all other systems have Jupiters and Neptunes and Earths? What other categories of worlds are there, currently unknown to us? Are all solar systems embedded in a vast spherical cloud of comets? Most stars in the sky are not solitary suns like our own, but double or multiple systems in which the stars are in mutual orbit. Are there planets in such systems? If so, what are they like? If, as we now think, planetary systems are a routine consequence of the origin of suns, have they followed very different evolutionary paths elsewhere? What do elderly planetary systems, billions of years more evolved than ours, look like? In the next few centuries our knowledge of other systems will become increasingly comprehensive. We will begin to know which to visit, which to seed, and which to settle.
Imagine we could accelerate continuously at 1 g-what we're comfortable with on good old terra firma-to the midpoint of our voyage, and decelerate continuously at 1 g until we arrive at our destination. It would then take a day to get to Mars, a week and a half to Pluto, a year to the Oort Cloud, and a few years to the nearest stars.
Even a modest extrapolation of our recent advances in transportation suggests that in only a few centuries we will be able to travel close to the speed of light. Perhaps this is hopelessly optimistic. Perhaps it will really take millennia or more. But unless we destroy ourselves first we will be inventing new technologies as strange to us as Voyager might be to our hunter-gatherer ancestors. Even today we can think of ways-clumsy, ruinously expensive, inefficient to be sure-of constructing a starship that approaches light speed. In time, the designs will become more elegant, more affordable, more efficient. The day will come when we overcome the necessity of jumping from comet to comet. We will begin to soar through the light-years and, as St. Augustine said of the gods of the ancient Greeks and Romans, colonize the sky.
Such descendants may be tens or hundreds of generations removed from anyone who ever lived on the surface of a planet. Their cultures will be different, their technologies far advanced, their languages changed, their association with machine intelligence much more intimate, perhaps their very appearance markedly altered from that of their nearly mythical ancestors who first tentatively set forth in the late twentieth century into the sea of space. But they will be human, at least in large part; they will be practitioners of high technology; they will have historical records. Despite Augustine's judgment on Lot's wife, that "no one who is being saved should long for what he is leaving," they will not wholly forget the Earth.
But we're not nearly ready, you may be thinking. As Voltaire put it in his Memnon, "our little terraqueous globe is the madhouse of those hundred thousand millions of worlds." We, who cannot even put our own planetary home in order, riven with rivalries and hatreds, despoiling our environment, murdering one another through irritation and inattention as well as on deadly purpose, and moreover a species that until only recently was convinced that the Universe was made for its sole benefit-are we to venture out into space, move worlds, reengineer planets, spread to neighboring star systems?
I do not imagine that it is precisely we, with our present customs and social conventions, who will be out there. If we continue to accumulate only power and not wisdom, we will surely destroy ourselves. Our very existence in that distant time requires that we will have changed our institutions and ourselves. How can I dare to guess about humans in the far future? It is, I think, only a matter of natural selection. If we become even slightly more violent, shortsighted, ignorant, and selfish than we are now, almost certainly we will have no future.
If you're young, it's just possible that we will be taking our first steps on near-Earth asteroids and Mars during your lifetime. To spread out to the moons of the Jovian planets and the Kuiper Comet Belt will take many generations more. The Oort Cloud will require much longer still. By the time we're ready to settle even the nearest other planetary systems, we will have changed. The simple passage of so many generations will have changed us. The different circumstances we will be living under will have changed us. Prostheses and genetic engineering will have changed us. Necessity will have changed us. We're an adaptable species.
It will not be we who reach Alpha Centauri and the other nearby stars. It will be a species very like us, but with more of our strengths and fewer of our weaknesses, a species returned to circumstances more like those for which it was originally evolved, more confident, farseeing, capable, and prudent-the sorts of beings we would want to represent us in a Universe that, for all we know, is filled with species much older, much more powerful, and very different.
The vast distances that separate the stars are providential. Beings and worlds are quarantined from one another. The quarantine is lifted only for those with sufficient self-knowledge and judgment to have safely traveled from star to star.


ON IMMENSE TIMESCALES, in hundreds of millions to billions of years, the centers of galaxies explode. We see, scattered across deep space, galaxies with "active nuclei," quasars, galaxies distorted by collisions, their spiral arms disrupted, star systems blasted with radiation or gobbled up by black holes-and we gather that on such timescales even interstellar space, even galaxies may not be safe.
         There is a halo of dark matter surrounding the Milky Way, extending perhaps halfway to the distance of the next spiral galaxy (M31 in the constellation Andromeda, which also contains hundreds of billions of stars). We do not know what this dark matter is, or how it is arranged-but some of it may be in worlds untethered to individual stars. If so, our descendants of the remote future will have an opportunity, over unimaginable intervals of time, to become established in intergalactic space, and to tiptoe to other galaxies.
But on the timescale for populating our galaxy, if not long before, we must ask: How immutable is this longing for safety that drives us outward? Will we one day feel content with the time our species has had and our successes, and willingly exit the cosmic stage? Millions of years from now-probably much sooner-we will have made ourselves into something else. Even if we do nothing intentionally, the natural process of mutation and selection will have worked our extinction or evolved us into some other species on just such a timescale (if we may judge by other mammals). Over the typical lifetime of a mammalian species, even if we were able to travel close to the speed of light and were dedicated to nothing else, we could not, I think, explore even a representative fraction of the Milky Way Galaxy. There's just too much of it. And beyond are a hundred billion galaxies more. Will our present motivations remain unchanged over geological, much less cosmological, timescales-when we ourselves have been transfigured? In such remote epochs, we may discover outlets for our ambitions far grander and more worthy than merely populating an unlimited number of worlds.
Perhaps, some scientists have imagined, we will one day create new forms of life, link minds, colonize stars, reconfigure galaxies, or prevent, in a nearby volume of space, the expansion of the Universe. In a 1993 article in the journal Nuclear Physics, the physicist Andrei Linde-conceivably, in a playful mood-suggests that laboratory experiments (it would have to be quite a laboratory) to create separate, closed-off, expanding universes might ultimately be possible. "However," he writes to me, "I myself do not know whether [this suggestion] is simply a joke or something else." In such a list of projects for the far future, we will have no difficulty in recognizing a continuing human ambition to arrogate powers once considered godlike-or, in that other more encouraging metaphor, to complete the Creation.

FOR MANY PAGES NOW, we have left the realm of plausible conjecture for the heady intoxication of nearly unconstrained speculation. It is time to return to our own age.
My grandfather, born before radio waves were even a laboratory curiosity, almost lived to see the first artificial satellite beeping down at us from space. There are people who were born before there was such a thing as an airplane, and who in old age saw four ships launched to the stars. For all our failings, despite our limitations and fallibilities, we humans are capable of greatness. This is true of our science and some areas of our technology, of our art, music, literature, altruism, and compassion, and even, on rare occasion, of our statecraft. What new wonders undreamt of in our time will we have wrought in another generation? And another? How far will our nomadic species have wandered by the end of the next century? And the next millennium?
Two billion years ago our ancestors were microbes; a halfbillion years ago, fish; a hundred million years ago, something like mice; ten million years ago, arboreal apes; and a million years ago, proto-humans puzzling out the taming of fire. Our evolutionary lineage is marked by mastery of change. In our time, the pace is quickening.
When we first venture to a near-Earth asteroid, we will have entered a habitat that may engage our species forever. The first voyage of men and women to Mars is the key step in transforming us into a multiplanet species. These events are as momentous as the colonization of the land by our amphibian ancestors and the descent from the trees by our primate ancestors.
Fish with rudimentary lungs and fins slightly adapted for walking must have died in great numbers before establishing a permanent foothold on the land. As the forests slowly receded, our upright apelike forebears often scurried back into the trees, fleeing the predators that stalked the savannahs. The transitions were painful, took millions of years, and were imperceptible to those involved. In our case the transition occupies only a few generations, and with only a handful of lives lost. The pace is so swift that we are still barely able to grasp what is happening.
Once the first children are born off Earth; once we have bases and homesteads on asteroids, comets, moons, and planets; once we're living off the land and bringing up new generations on other worlds, something will have changed forever in human history. But inhabiting other worlds does not imply abandoning this one, any more than the evolution of amphibians meant the end of fish. For a very long time only a small fraction of us will be out there.
"In modern Western society," writes the scholar Charles Lindholm,

the erosion of tradition and the collapse of accepted religious belief leaves us without a telos [an end to which we strive], a sanctified notion of humanity's potential. Bereft of a sacred project, we have only a demystified image of a frail and fallible humanity no longer capable of becoming god-like.

I believe it is healthy-indeed, essential-to keep our frailty and fallibility firmly in mind. I worry about people who aspire to be "god-like." But as for a long-term goal and a sacred project, there is one before us. On it the very survival of our species depends. If we have been locked and bolted into a prison of the self, here is an escape hatch-something worthy, something vastly larger than ourselves, a crucial act on behalf of humanity. Peopling other worlds unifies nations and ethnic groups, binds the generations, and requires us to be both smart and wise. It liberates our nature and, in part, returns us to our beginnings. Even now, this new telos is within our grasp.
The pioneering psychologist William James called religion a "feeling of being at home in the Universe." Our tendency has been, as I described in the early chapters of this book, to pretend that the Universe is how we wish our home would be, rather than to revise our notion of what's homey so it embraces the Universe. If, in considering James' definition, we mean the real Universe, then we have no true religion yet. That is for another time, when the sting of the Great Demotions is well behind us, when we are acclimatized to other worlds and they to us, when we are spreading outward to the stars.
The Cosmos extends, for all practical purposes, forever. After a brief sedentary hiatus, we are resuming our ancient nomadic way of life. Our remote descendants, safely arrayed on many worlds through the Solar System and beyond, will be unified by their common heritage, by their regard for their home planet, and by the knowledge that, whatever other life may be, the only humans in all the Universe come from Earth.
They will gaze up and strain to find the blue dot in their skies. They will love it no less for its obscurity and fragility. They will marvel at how vulnerable the repository of all our potential once was, how perilous our infancy, how humble our beginnings, how many rivers we had to cross before we found our way.
















       












       ABOUT THE AUTHOR
CARL SAGAN was the David Duncan Professor of Astronomy and Space Sciences and Director of the Laboratory for Planetary Studies at Cornell University. He played a leading role in the American space
program since its inception. He was a consultant and advisor to NASA since the 1950s, briefed the Apollo astronauts before their flights to the Moon, and was an experimenter on the Mariner, Viking, Voyager, and Galileo expeditions to the planets. He helped solve the mysteries of the high temperature of Venus (answer: massive greenhouse effect), the seasonal changes on Mars (answer: windblown dust), and the reddish haze of Titan (answer: complex organic molecules).
For his work, Dr. Sagan received the NASA medals for Exceptional Scientific Achievement and (twice) for Distinguished Public Service, as well as the NASA Apollo Achievement Award. Asteroid 2709 Sagan is named after him. He was also awarded the John F. Kennedy Astronautics Award of the American Astronautical Society, the Explorers Club 75th Anniversary Award, the Konstantin Tsiolkovsky Medal of the Soviet Cosmonauts Federation, and the Masursky Award of the American Astronomical Society ("for his extraordinary contributions to the development of planetary science .... As a scientist trained in both astronomy and biology, Dr. Sagan has made seminal contributions to the study of planetary atmospheres, planetary surfaces, the history of the Earth, and exobiology. Many of the most productive planetary scientists working today are his present and former students and associates").


                         ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Most of the material in this book is new. A number of chapters have evolved from articles first published in Pa-rade magazine, a supplement to the Sunday editions of American newspapers which, with an estimated 80 million readers, may be the most widely read magazine in the world. I am greatly in-debted to Walter Anderson, the editor?in?chief, and David Currier, the executive editor, for their encouragement and editorial wisdom; and to the readers of Parade, whose letters have helped me under-stand where I have been clear, and where obscure, and how my arguments are received. Portions of other chapters have emerged from articles published in Issues in Science and Technology, Discover, The Planetary Report, Scientific American, and Popular Mechanics.
Aspects of this book have been discussed with a large number of friends and colleagues, whose comments have greatly improved it. Although there are too many to list by name, I would like to express my real gratitude to all of them. I want especially, though, to thank Norman Augustine, Roger Bonnet, Freeman Dyson, Louis Friedman, Everett Gibson, Daniel Goldin, J. Richard Gott III, Andrei Linde, Jon Lomberg, David Morrison, Roald Sagdeev, Steven Soter, Kip Throne, and Frederick Turner for their comments on all or part of the manuscript; Seth Kaufmann, Peter Thomas, and Joshua Grinspoon for their help with tables and graphs; and a brilliant array of astronomical artists, acknowledged at each illustration, who have permitted me to showcase some of their work. Through the generosity of Kathy Hoyt, Al McEwen, and Larry Soderblom, I've been able to display some of the exceptional photomosiacs, airbrush maps, and other reductions of NASA images accomplished at the Branch of Astrogeology, U.S. Geological Survey.
I am indebted to Andrea Barnett, Laurel Parker, Jennifer Bland, Loren Mooney, Karenn Gobrecht, Deborah Pearlstein, and the late Eleanor York for their able technical assistance; and to Harry Evans, Walter Weintz, Ann Godoff, Kathy Rosenbloom, Andy Carpenter, Martha Schwartz, and Alan MacRobert on the production end. Beth Tondreau is responsible for much of the design elegance on these pages.
On matters of space policy, I have benefited from discussions with other members of the board of directors of The Planetary Society, especially Bruce Murray, Louis Friedman, Norman Augustine, Joe Ryan, and the late Thomas O. Paine. Devoted to the exploration of the Solar System, the search for extraterrestrial life, and international missions by humans to other worlds, it is the organization that most nearly embodies the perspective of the present book.

Those readers interested in more information on this nonprofit organization, the largest space?interest group on Earth, may contact:

THE PLANETARY SOCIETY 
65 N. Catalina Avenue 
Pasadena, CA 91106 
Tel.: 1?800--9 WORLDS

As is true of every book I've written since 1977, I am more grateful than I can say to Ann Druyan for searching criticism and fundamental contributions both on content and style. In the vastness of space and the immensity of time, it is still my joy to share a planet and an epoch with Annie.






































       REFERENCES
             (a few citations and suggestions for further reading)


PLANETARY EXPLORATION IN GENERAL:

J. Kelly Beatty and Andrew Chaiken, editors, The New Solar Sys-tem, third edition (Cambridge: Cambridge 
         University Press, 1990).
         Eric Chaisson and Steve McMillan, Astronomy Today (Engle-wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993).
Esther C. Goddard, editor, The Papers of Robert H. Goddard (New York: McGraw?Hill, 1970) (three         
        volumes).
Ronald Greeley, Planetary Landscapes, second edition (New York: Chapman and Hall, 1994).
         William J. Kaufmann III, Universe, fourth edition (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1993).
         Harry Y. McSween, Jr., Stardust to Planets (New York: St. Martin's, 1994).
         Ron Miller and William K. Hartmann, The Grand Tour: A Traveler's Guide to the Solar System, revised edition  
                   (New York: Workman, 1993).
         David Morrison, Exploring Planetary Worlds (New York: Scientific American Books, 1993).
          Bruce C. Murray, journey to the Planets (New York: W.W. Norton, 1989).
Jay M. Pasachoff, Astronomy: From Earth to the Universe (New York: Saunders, 1993).
Carl Sagan, Cosmos (New York: Random House, 1980).
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, The Call of the Cosmos (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1960) (English 
         translation).

CHAPTER 3, THE GREAT DEMOTIONS

John D. Barron and Frank J. Tipler, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle (New York: Oxford University Press, 
        1986).
         A. Linde, Particle Physics and Inflationary Cosmology (Harwood Academy Publishers, 1991).
B. Stewart, "Science or Animism?," Creation /Evolution, vol. 12, no. 1 (1992), pp. 18?19.
Steven Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory (New York: Vintage Books, 1994).

CHAPTER 4, A UNIVERSE NOT MADE FOR US

Brian Appleyard, Understanding the Present: Science and the Soul of Modern Man (London: Picador/Pan Books  
        Ltd., 1992). Passages quoted appear, in order, on the following pages: 232, 27, 32, 19, 19, 27, 9, xiv, 137,      
        112?113, 206,  10, 239, 8, 8.
         J. B. Bury, History of the Papacy in the 19th Century (New York: Schocken, 1964). Here, as in many other 
        sources, the  1864 Syllabus is transcribed into its "positive" form (e.g., "Divine revelation is perfect") rather 
       than as part of a list of   condemned errors ("Divine revelation is imperfect").

CHAPTER 5, IS THERE INTELLIGENT LIFE ON EARTH?

Carl Sagan, W. R. Thompson, Robert Carlsson, Donald Gurnett, and Charles Hord, "A Search for Life on Earth  
         from the  Galileo Spacecraft," Nature, vol. 365 (1993), pp. 715?721.
CHAPTER 7, AMONG THE MOONS OF SATURN

Jonathan Lunine, "Does Titan Have Oceans?," American Scientist, vol. 82 (1994), pp. 134?144.
          Carl Sagan, W. Reid Thompson, and Bishun N. Khare, "Titan: A Laboratory for Prebiological Organic       
         Chemistry,"  Accounts of Chemical Research, vol. 25 (1992), pp. 286?292.
          J. William Schopf, Major Events in the History of Life (Boston: Jones and Bartlett, 1992).

CHAPTER 8, THE FIRST NEW PLANET

 Bernard Cohen, "G. D. Cassini and the Number of the Planets," in Nature, Experiment and the Sciences,               
      Trevor Levere   and W. R. Shea, editors (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1990).

CHAPTER 9, AN AMERICAN SHIP AT THE FRONTIERS OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM

        Murmurs of Earth, CD?ROM of the Voyager interstellar record, with introduction by Carl Sagan and  
                 Ann  Druyan (Los  Angeles: Warner New Media, 1992), WNM 14022.
        Alexander Wolszczan, "Confirmation of Earth?Mass Planets Orbiting the Millisecond Pulsar PSR   
                  B1257+12,"  Science, vol. 264 (1994), pp. 538?542.

CHAPTER 12, THE GROUND MELTS

         Peter Cattermole, Venus: The Geological Survey (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994).
         Peter Francis, Volcanoes: A Planetary Perspective (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).

CHAPTER 1 3, THE GIFT OF APOLLO

Andrew Chaikin, A Man on the Moon (New York: Viking, 1994).
Michael Collins, Liftoff (New York: Grove Press, 1988).
Daniel Deudney, "Forging Missiles into Spaceships," World Policy Journal, vol. 2, no. 2 (Spring 1985), pp. 271?303.
Harry Hurt, For All Mankind (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1988).
Richard S. Lewis, The Voyages of Apollo: The Exploration of the Moon (New York: Quadrangle, 1974).
Walter A. McDougall, The Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the Space Age (New York:          
        Basic  Books, 1985).
Alan Shepherd, Deke Slayton et al., Moonshot (Atlanta: Hyperion, 1994).
Don E. Wilhelms, To a Rocky Moon: A Geologist's History or Lunar Exploration (Tucson: University of 
       Arizona  Press, 1993).

CHAPTER 14, EXPLORING OTHER WORLDS AND PROTECTING THIS ONE

Kevin W. Kelley, editor, The Home Planet (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1988).
          Carl Sagan and Richard Turco, A Path Where No Man Thought: Nuclear Winter and the End of the Arms        
        Race  (New York: Random House, 1990).
Richard Turco, Earth Under Siege: Air Pollution and Global Change (New York: Oxford University 
        Press, in  press).
CHAPTER 15, THE GATES OF THE WONDER WORLD OPEN

Victor R. Baker, The Channels of Mars (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1982).
Michael H. Carr, The Surface of Mars (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1981).
H. H. Kieffer, B. M. Jakosky, C. W. Snyder, and M. S. Matthews, editors, Mars (Tucson: University of Arizona    
        Press, 1992).
John Noble Wilford, Mars Beckons: The Mysteries, the Challenges, the Expectations of Our Next Great 
        Adventure in Space  (New York: Knopf, 1990).

CHAPTER 18, THE MARSH OF CAMARINA

Clark R. Chapman and David Morrison, "Impacts on the Earth by Asteroids and Comets: Assessing the Hazard," 
         Nature, vol. 367 (1994), pp. 33-40.
         A. W. Harris, G. Canavan, C. Sagan, and S. J. Ostro, "The Deflection Dilemma: Use vs. Misuse of Technologies        
         for Avoiding Interplanetary Collision Hazards," in Hazards Due to Asteroids and Comets, T. Gehrels,  
         editor (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1994).
          John S. Lewis and Ruth A. Lewis, Space Resources: Breaking the Bonds of Earth (New York: Columbia 
         University Press, 1987).
          C. Sagan and S. J. Ostro, "Long?Range Consequences of Interplanetary Collision Hazards," Issues in Science and  
        Technology  (Summer 1994), pp. 67?72.

CHAPTER 19, REMAKING THE PLANETS

J. D. Bernal, The World, the Flesh, and the Devil (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1969; first edition, 
       1929).
James B. Pollack and Carl Sagan, "Planetary Engineering," in J. Lewis and M. Matthews, editors, Near?Earth  
       Resources (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1992).

CHAPTER 20, DARKNESS

Frank Drake and Dava Sobel, Is Anyone Out There? (New York: Delacorte, 1992).
Paul Horowitz and Carl Sagan, "Project META: A Five?Year All?Sky Narrowband Radio Search for 
       Extraterrestrial Intelligence,"  Astrophysical Journal, vol. 415 (1992), pp. 218?235.
          Thomas R. McDonough, The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1987).
Carl Sagan, Contact: A Novel (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1985) .

CHAPTER 21, TO THE SKY!

J. Richard Gott III, "Implications of the Copernican Principle for Our Future Prospects," Nature, vol. 263 (1993), 
         pp. 315?319.

CHAPTER 22, TIPTOEING THROUGH THE MILKY WAY

I. A. Crawford, "Interstellar Travel: A Review for Astronomers," Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical      
        Society, vol. 31 (1990), p. 377.
I. A. Crawford, "Space, World Government, and `The End of History,' "Journal of the British Interplanetary  
       Society, vol. 46 (1993), pp. 415?420.
         Freeman J. Dyson, The World, the Flesh, and the Devil (London: Birkbeck College, 1972).
Ben R. Finney and Eric M. Jones, editors, Interstellar Migration and the Human Experience (Berkeley:  
        University of  California Press, 1985).
         Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York: The Free Press, 1992).
         Charles Lindholm, Charisma (Oxford: Blackwell, 1990). The comment on the need for a telos is in this book.
 Eugene F. Mallove and Gregory L. Matloff, The Starflight Handbook (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1989).
 Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan, Comet (New York: Random House, 1985).
